i'm intrigued by these sloggers
so i've come to the start of park street
to the site of a music hall
that was a haunt of the park street gang
to meet birmingham historian
professor karl chin we're in the heart
of birmingham
this is where birmingham began and from
which it grew we're in the ballroom
look over there said martin's in the
ball rings the park street gang
they saw this as their patch and on the
night before christmas eve
1893 when it was called the canterbury
music hall
there was a killing of a young man
outside here
right here yeah on this spot very sad
there was another
well-established stocking gang nearby
just across the way it's called the
bathroom street gang
some of the barford street gang were in
this musical the park street gang came
outside and waited for them in numbers
when a few of the barford street gang
came outside they were attacked
and then a young man from the barford
street gang called john metcalf
knifed a member of the park street gang
in the neck with a pen knife
unfortunately john sherry died
he was 18 and he was a nail maker we
just think of the ripples that must have
sent
around the whole of park street around
this whole area on another occasion the
manager of the music hall here was
killed
the manager yeah the manager was killed
as well on another occasion
so this is really escalating this is
like gang land warfare we're on the
periphery between where two gangs meet
they meet here and it actually results
in murder
it's a brutal introduction to the
slogging gangs
as well carl wants to reveal to me who
they really were
so it says here in another case which
occurred last saturday week a young man
named eastwood was murderously assaulted
by a number of members
of a gang known as the small heath peaky
blinders
slogging gangs and sluggers are the
terms used for the gangs of birmingham
the backstreet gangs of birmingham
before the term peaky blinder comes in
so that is familiar peaky blinders
to to many people because of the the tv
series the drama
the reality is very different the late
19th century
early very early 20th century there's a
few english cities
that have got a major backstreet gang
problem there's liverpool
there's manchester and salford there's
london and there's birmingham
so they fight each other one street
against the net yeah
yeah are they are they kind of making a
living out of it it was this after work
how does that relate to okay mostly
working chaps in their late teens and
twenties
you've got a very different demographic
to today haven't we
so many young people so many young
people so saturdays after work
sunday's the lord's day they've got no
parks got no recreation grounds
and so where did they gather weight
ground so they were meeting
on what was the park street they would
have met there and on other waste
grounds
now their pastimes are off sports they
play roughly with each other
it's a hard world that they're living in
and hardness is a
a quality value by young men in a world
where they owe nothing
what's the only thing they can say
they're better at than they're better
off
fighting but when you say fight what
does that mean right so
they slog and okay so slogging is
so it's from an old pugilistic term yeah
to strike with a heavy blow
they're dirty fighters they use their
boots
they're belts that's their main weapon
belts with the big brass buckles which
they're making in birmingham yes yeah
and they wrap them around their wrist
then they slash and they slash
so this isn't just one family this is a
whole load of gangs all over the city
yeah and many different families
involved
so is razor blades that's real is it no
that's not real no so there's no there
aren't the razors in there no
it's not so what they use they're using
the belts they use the belts the boots
and then knives knives uh handkerchiefs
filled with stones
they throw how they break bricks they'll
throw the half house bricks at each
other and the police
one policeman gets bricked to death in
birmingham this is a man called charles
battle
now what's he wearing so he's got this
hat
on yeah but it's not a peak cap no what
kind of hat is this a bowler this is
called a billy
now charles battle is wearing the
fashion
of the first peaky blinders they had
their hair closely cropped like battle
but a lot of the peaky blinders sported
a quiff of hair on one side
and they plastered it on the forehead
obliquely and they like to show it off
so
what have they got to do to the billy
they they kind of tip the hat to
one side
yeah so they're showing off their fancy
quiff yeah
and that's what happens when they bring
the flat cap in
a lot of them still have got a quiff and
they pulled the peek of the cap down
and that's blinding their eyes yeah
shadowy the eyes isn't it blind in the
eye
so do you think that's where the term
comes from i don't think you know
i know i know it because of the accounts
from people
who lived at the period here's another
one this is a man called edward derrick
derek eric derrick he's a teenager here
don house-breaking
he also is a man who brutally beats his
wife ada
regularly he's a horrible nasty
wife-beating thug
he's my great-grandfather
that's amazing so you are a direct
descendant
from the peak of blind he's left his
mark upon me
in my looks how do you feel about that i
can't hide away from that can i
and as a historian if i'm writing about
the ancestors of other people who are
violence i've got to share those in my
own family that
were in collegeable roles and he was
that's the truth of family history
yeah yeah it's it's reality just
thinking back to park street and and
birmingham more generally
is there something going on around here
that is creating
these kind of gangs poverty was
widespread in victorian britain
there's this paradox of the wealthiest
nation in the world
with so much poverty the poor are living
in badly built houses
crammed into a tightly packed area and
then
in birmingham london all the big cities
railway lines have been built
whose homes have been knocked down for
them poorer people
so overcrowding goes up so the problems
of the poor in the late 19th century i
would argue
are actually worsening it's the absolute
dark
underbelly of the victorian age you know
people who celebrate the victorians and
think they created all these wonders and
we've seen the railways and
and the amazing civic buildings but
the dark side of that the underbelly of
it is exactly the sorts of things that
you're talking about
at the end of the 19th century there
were at least 50 violent street gangs in
birmingham
something needed to be done
improved policing and the rise of
sporting clubs helped
but there was another solution
throughout the country public parks were
created in the most deprived urban areas
[Music]
in 1893 the park street burial ground
was turned into a space described as a
health resort for local children
for 120 years it symbolized the desire
of enlightened victorians to improve the
lives of ordinary people
in our industrial cities
[Music]